Using Parallelism to Analyze Very Large Files: Google's Map Reduce Paradigm
============================================================================

Introduction
------------

Up to now in this course, you have been writing programs that run
*sequentially* by executing one step at a time until they complete
(unless you mistakenly wrote one with an infinite loop!).
Sequential execution is the standard basic mode of operation on all
computers. However, when we need to process large amounts of data
that might take a long time to complete, we can use a technique
known as *parallel computing*, in which we define portions of our
computation to run at the same time by using multiple processors on
a single machine or multiple computers at the same time.

In a lab and homework in this course you will use a system called
*MapReduce* that was designed to harness the power of many
computers together in a *cluster* to execute in parallel to process
large amounts of data. You will be writing programs designed to run
in parallel, or concurrently (at the same time), each one working
on a portion of the data. By doing this, your parallel program will
be faster than a corresponding sequential version using one
computer to process all of the data. We call this kind of program
one that uses *data parallelism*, because the data is split and
processed in parallel.

*MapReduce* is a strategy for solving problems using two stages for
processing data that includes a sort action between those two
stages. This problem-solving strategy has been used for decades in
*functional programming* languages such as LISP or Scheme. More
recently Google has adapted the map-reduce programming model
(`Dean and Ghemawat,2004 <http://labs.google.com/papers/mapreduce.html>`_)
to function efficiently on large clusters of computers to process
vast amounts of data--for example, Google's selection of the entire
web.

The Apache Foundation provides an open-source implementation of
MapReduce for clusters called
`Hadoop <http://hadoop.apache.org/core/>`_, which has primarily
been implemented by Yahoo!. Student researchers at St. Olaf College
have created a user interface called *WebMapReduce (WMR)* that uses
Hadoop to make map-reduce programming convenient enough for
students in computer science courses to use.

Description of the MapReduce programming model
----------------------------------------------

In map-reduce programming, a programmer provides two functions,
called the *mapper* and the *reducer*, for carrying out a sequence
of two computational stages on potentially vast quantities of data.
A series of identical 'map' functions can be run on a large amount
of input data in parallel, as shown in Figure mrconcept. The
results from these mapper processes, spread across many computers,
are then sent to reduce functions, also spread across many
computers. The most important concepts to remember are these:


-  The mapper function that you design is applied to each line of
   data, and breaks up that data into labelled units of interest,
   called *key-value pairs*.

-  The reducer function that you design is then applied to all the
   key-value pairs *that share the same key*, allowing some kind of
   consolidation of those pairs.


    |image|

    Figure 1: The concept behind how map functions can run in parallel and
    pass their results to reduce functions, whose results are output in
    sorted order by the keys created by the reduce function.(mrconcept)


In a *map-reduce system*, which is made of of many computers
working at the same time, some computers are assigned mapper tasks,
some shuffle the data from mappers and hand it over to reducers,
and some computers handle the reducer tasks. Between the mapper and
reducer stages, a map-reduce system automatically reorganizes the
intermediate key-value pairs, so that each call of the reducer
function can receive a complete set of key-value pairs
*for a particular key*, and so that the reducer function is called
for every key in sorted order. We will refer to this reorganization
of key-value pairs between the mapper and reducer stages as
*shuffling*. Figure mrstages illustrates the three steps of
mapping, shuffling, and reducing.

        |image1|

    Figure 2: How each computer in a cluster breaks up the work and runs
    mappers locally, then shuffles the key-value pair results by key and
    sends the results for each key to other computers who run reducers.(mrstages)



Before the mapper stage, a map-reduce system such as Hadoop breaks
the entire input data up into portions, known as *splits*; each
split is assigned to one computer in a cluster, which then applies
the mapper function to each line of that split. Thus,multiple
computers can process different splits of data simultaneously.
(With, say, 2000 computers or *nodes* in a large-scale commercial
cluster, quadrillions of bytes (*petabytes*) of data might be
processed in a few hours that might otherwise require years of
computing time on a single computer.) Likewise, reducers may be run
on multiple computers in order to speed up the performance of that
stage.

*Parallel computing* is the practice of using multiple computations
at the same time in order to improve the performance of those
computations. The map-reduce programming model is an example of two
varieties of parallel computing:


#. *Data parallelism*, in which multiple portions of data are
   processed simultaneously on multiple processors (CPUs). This occurs
   when multiple splits of data are handled on different computers in
   a cluster.

#. *Pipelining*, in which data is processed in a sequence of
   stages, like an assembly line. The mapper and reducer stages
   represent a two-stage pipeline. If shuffling is considered as its
   own stage, the pipeline would have three stages. Pipelining is an
   example of *task parallelism*, in which different computational
   tasks take place at the same time. In the case of the map-reduce
   stages, mapping could overlap with shuffling to some extent, by
   having mappers stream their output to shuffle processes, which
   would prepare it for reducers while the mappers are generating
   results. Thus, different computers could handle each of these
   tasks.


.. note:: Hadoop actually carries out the three stages of mapping,
            shuffling, and reducing *sequentially* (one stage after the other),
            instead of using task parallelism. That is, all of the mapping
            occurs before any of the shuffling begins, and all of the shuffling
            is completed before any of the reducing begins. (See below for
            reasons why.) Thus, Hadoop's implementation of map-reduce doesn't
            literally qualify as pipeline parallelism, because multiple stages
            do not take place at the same time. However, true pipeline
            parallelism *does* take place within our testing program used in
            the ``WebMapReduce`` interface, called ``wmrtest``, which is useful
            for testing and debugging mapper and reducer functions with small
            data. In general, solving problems using pipeline (assembly line)
            thinking creates opportunities for using parallelism to improve
            performance.

**Fault tolerance.** Large (e.g., 2000-node) clusters offer the
potential for great performance speedup, but breakdowns are
inevitable when using so many computers. In order to avoid losing
the results of enormous computations because of breakdowns,
map-reduce systems such as Hadoop are *fault tolerant*, i.e.,
designed to recover from a significant amount of computer failure.
Here are some fault-tolerance strategies used in Hadoop:


-  All data is *replicated* on multiple computers. Thus,if one
   computer fails, its data is readily available on other computers.

-  If a computer running a mapper function fails, that mapper
   operation can thus be restarted on another computer that has the
   same data (after discarding the partial results (key-value pairs)
   from incomplete mapper calls on that failed computer).

-  If all mappers have completed, but a computer fails during
   shuffling, then any lost mapper results can be regenerated on
   another computer, and shuffling can resume using non-failed
   computers.

-  Shuffling results are also replicated, so if a computer running
   reducers fails, those reducers can be rerun on another computer.


.. note:: Hadoop's fault tolerance features make it a good use for
            the *selkie* cluster at Macalester, which uses the many computers
            in two large labs in the MSCS Department in Olin-Rice.
            Occasionally, these are sometimes unfortunately rebooted by users.
            These occasional failures of machines in the cluster can be
            compensated for by Hadoop. However, when many of these computers
            are rebooted at about the same time, all of the copies of some data
            may become unavailable, leading to Hadoop failures.


.. |image| image:: MapReptduceConcept.jpg
.. |image1| image:: MapReduceStages.png
